---
layout: post
asset-type: post
name: time-to-go
title: 'Time To Go'
date: 2015-11-02 09:00:00 +00:00
author: Samir Talwar
canonical:
    name: my personal blog
    href: http://monospacedmonologues.com/post/132392975060/time-to-go
image:
    src: /assets/img/custom/blog/time-to-go.jpg
    attribution:
        text: sea alone 2, by Omer Unlu
        href: https://flic.kr/p/a4R6Q4
---

I'm writing that blog post I never thought I'd write.

When I joined [Codurance](http://codurance.com/), I knew I was joining something special.

I was right.

Codurance is going from strength to strength, on the back of that most powerful of technologies: human beings with great willpower, desire to learn, a passion for teaching and a creative streak I've not seen anywhere else. It's people, not tools, frameworks or flavours of the month, that make Codurance what it is, and I'm so happy to have been a part of shaping that vision.

So it is with sadness that I announce my departure from a place that for two years, I called home and meant it. I spent more time with my colleagues than I did with my flatmates and my family, and for good reason: I've learnt so much, so fast. The knowledge imparted to me by my colleagues, especially Sandro and Mash, has been incredible, and I will be eternally grateful for it.

I'm so proud of how Codurance has grown from just a few of us, hopping around cafés and hunting for power sockets, to an 18-person organisation known by so many people, with serious clout and a reputation for doing more than expected, every time. I have no doubt that it will continue to go from strength to strength.

So why am I leaving? Truth be told, it's quite hard to say. I'm looking for some adventure in my life, and Codurance is almost too big for me now—the projects too large, the clients too complex. I've been enjoying myself so much, but I feel like the time is right to strike out on my own and try for, well, smaller things.

I know I'll be staying in touch with the Codurance crew (and sneaking into the office to hang out with Mani when he leasts expects it), but I'm not planning on losing touch with the others I've met along the way either. You can reach me [by email](mailto:samir@noodlesandwich.com) or [on Twitter](https://twitter.com/SamirTalwar). Don't hesitate to shout about anything. I'll be around.

