---
layout: post
asset-type: post
name: card-game
title: Our profession is a card game
description: Each programming paradigm, practice, design pattern, architecture, language, tool, ... is a card. 
date: 2018-07-26 20:00:00 +00:00
author: Raquel M Carmena
image:
   src: /assets/custom/img/blog/2018-07-26-card-game/card-game.jpg
tags:
- craftsmanship

---

# How to play

## Overview

In this game you must get cards. The more cards you get, the more possibilities to play a good move.

## Players

Everyone decides the team in which to play.

In order to play good moves, choose positive, constructive and nice people who make things easier, because it will bring out the best of you.

## Card types

There are different types of cards:

**_Hard_ cards**. You get this type of cards for:

* each programming paradigm, practice, design pattern, architecture, language or tool you learn,
* each time you face legacy code and you step forward to the good maintenance of it,
* each time you think _What if ..._,
* each conference you attend,
* each book you read,
* each article you read,
* each time you don't believe in magic and you discover the reason why it works now.

**_Catalytic_ cards**. You get this type of cards when:

* sharing your knowledge,
* saying _Thank you!_ to another colleague,
* saying _Sorry, it wasn't my intention_ to another colleague,
* giving feedback,
* receiving feeback,
* getting a simple solution for a complex problem,
* listening to an apprentice with respect.

In order to know more about the term _catalytic_, watch <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SJnVhkEx8Cs" target="_blank">Emotional Intelligence for Engineers</a> by April Wensel.

# How to win

There aren't <a href="http://wiki.c2.com/?NoSilverBullet" target="_blank">wild cards</a>. You must play with the cards, i.e. you must think. Don't forget common sense and pragmatism.

Don't discard _hard_ cards:

* They may be a bad choice in a move, but they may be very useful in another one. 
* All of them have a value, not only trending ones.

You get new cards with the learnings, successes and failures, from each card.

# Acknowledgments

* **Pablo Albizu**, **Iker Mariñelarena**, **Mikel Ros** and **Gorka Moreno**, organizers of the awesome <a href="http://pamplonaswcraft.com" target="_blank">Pamplona Software Crafters Conference</a>, for trusting me to participate with my talk <a href="/videos/2018-07-05-be-open-minded-my-friend">Be open-minded, my friend</a>, where I gave away empty cards to take notes and I explained this idea. 
* **Helder De Oliveira** and **Jordi Anguela** for their signed cards after my talk. I'll keep them with me forever.
* **Gabriel Moral** for his idea about trending cards.
* My colleague **Alejandro Scandroli** for his beautiful feedback about this analogy. It encouraged me to write it here.
