---
author: Sandro Mancuso
layout: post
name: mentoring-in-software-craftsmanship
title: "Mentorship in Software Craftsmanship"
date: 2011-10-05 00:45:00 +01:00
---

###How's mentorship seen in Software Craftsmanship?

###First, a little bit of background and metaphor

In the medieval times, apprentices would work in workshops an would be
mentored by senior craftsmen (journeymen) or by the master craftsman
himself. The apprentice had the responsibility to learn, observing the
master's and everyone else's work, questioning everything and practising
as much as he could. This was different from the teacher/student
relationship where the teacher had the responsibility to teach. Here it
was the apprentice that had to push his own development.

The apprentice, mentored by the master, would learn and refine his
skills on a daily basis. Over time, the master would reach his limit as
in what he could teach the apprentice and the knowledge and skills gap
between both would not be that big any more. The master would then
publicly recognise the apprentice as a professional that could take on
work on his own and would deliver it with the same quality that the he
would deliver himself. The master, at this point, would be putting his
own reputation on the line since he was the one that trained the
apprentice and was now vouching for his ability. 

This would be the graduation point. Now the apprentice was ready to
start his own journey, as a journeyman. As a journeyman, he would then
go from town to town, work for and learn from different masters up to a
point that he would be recognised by all of these masters and other
craftsmen as a master himself. He would then be ready to have his own
shop and start mentoring other journeymen and apprentices.

###Back to the present

From now on, instead of master/apprentice, I'll be using mentor/mentee.
The main reason is that you don't need to be a master craftsman to
mentor someone. You also don't need to be an apprentice to have a
mentor. Besides that, each developer has different areas of expertise.
They can be very senior in certain areas and completely ignorant in
other areas. As we all know, software development is not as limited as a
blacksmith's workshop in the medieval times. 

###The role of the mentor

Deciding to mentor someone is a big responsibility. The role of a mentor
is more than just be available on the phone and answer a few questions
here and there. Although this can be very helpful, the role of a mentor
goes way beyond than that. The mentor has the responsibility to make the
mentee a good professional and that includes the technical and the
personal side. More than just teaching the mentee a specific framework
or technique, the mentor will also be teaching the mentee how to become
a professional software developer, including ethics and code of conduct.
From the technical perspective, the mentor will do his best to teach
everything he knows. If they don't work together, the mentor is expected
to reserve formal time to work with the mentee. From the personal
perspective, a mentor should help the mentee in his career (journey),
giving some guidance, advices, opening doors or showing the doors he has
already opened himself, introducing the mentee to his own professional
circle and whatever else the mentor judges that can be important for the
mentees.    

###The role of the mentee

The mentee is expected to do whatever he or she can to learn from the
mentor. The mentee must be open-minded, be able to take criticism on
board, be able to listen and also be very proactive in terms of
perpetuating the knowledge. Practice is key. The mentee is expected to
practice as much as possible, making him or herself better everyday.
Mentees are also expected to produce something. Something where the
mentor can measure their progress and possibly identify areas of
improvement. Besides the direct benefits to the mentee, this is also the
best way to keep mentors excited to be helping. Mentees must show
passion and a clear desire to learn otherwise mentors will probably
loose interest and find it a waste of time.  

###Gains and sacrifices

Mentors have the opportunity to perpetuate their knowledge since they
need to organise their ideas to teach someone. Mentors will also need to
be studying and practising hard to keep feeding his mentee, what
obviously is a good thing. They will get the satisfaction of helping
developers to progress in their careers, with good foundation, ethics
and professionalism. They will be doing their part in rasing the bar of
our industry, training the next generation, and this, on its own, is a
very noble cause. But there are sacrifices and the main one is time.
Mentors are expected to dedicate time to their mentees. If mentor and
mentee work together in a daily basis, they won't need much time outside
work. However, if they don't, mentors need to be clear they will need to
find and reserve time for their mentees, ideally in a regular basis.

Mentees have the opportunity to speed up their development as
professional software developers. They benefit from the mentor's
experience acquired over the years, shortening the time they would take
to learn something and avoiding to commit the same mistakes. They also
have someone they trust that could offer a different perspective on the
things they are going through (technical issue, problem with a manager,
process, bureaucracy, deadlines, estimation, etc). Without any
scientific evidence to back me up, I would dare to say that with the
right attitude from both parts and a good amount of time together, the
mentee could learn in two years what the mentor learned in ten. That
gives the mentees a massive head-start in their careers. Time should
never be called a sacrifice from the mentees perspective. When someone
is getting a lot of knowledge and help for free, possibly saving years
of their careers, complaining about time (or lack of it) would be very
short-sighted, to say the least. 

###Mutual Respect

Both mentors and mentees should respect each other. In order to have a
healthy and prosperous relationship, there must be a commitment from
both parts. This commitment is the mutual respect. The mentor shows
respect with regular interactions with the mentee and time
commitment. The mentee shows respect with his commitment to excel and
demonstration of progress. That's the minimum a mentee could do for
someone that is sacrificing time with family and friends in order to
help him. 


*In following posts I'll be exploring things like different types of
mentorship, activities that could be performed by mentors and mentees,
criteria for choosing a mentor and a mentee, public recognition,
professional reputation, graduation, mentorship duration, how this could
change our industry and a few other points. Watch this space.*

*[Part 2: Choosing a mentor and a mentee and also common mentorship misconceptions](/2011/10/10/mentoring-in-software-craftsmanship_09/)*

*[Part 3: What mentors and mentees should do, how long it should last, how does it end public recognition and reputation](/2011/10/28/mentorship-in-software-craftsmanship/)*
