---
layout: post
name: test-deafness
title: Test Deafness
date: 2013-08-23 03:26:00.000000000 +01:00
author: Sandro Mancuso
image:
    src: /assets/img/custom/blog/test-deafness.jpg
tags:
- craftsmanship
- tdd
---

A few months ago I was talking to a musician friend of mine. He is also
Brazilian, same age as me, and moved to the UK on the same year I did.
As we were talking about music, I mentioned I like punk rock. He said he
likes punk rock as well, but as a musician, he listens to a bit of
everything. The conversation was going well until he asked me what my
favourite bands were. "[Legiao
Urbana](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legi%C3%A3o_Urbana)" is my
favourite Brazilian band I said. "Seriously?" he said with a puzzled
face. "They are rubbish, man."

As he was a friend (he became an enemy after that stupid comment), I
thought to myself: How can I make him suffer for the rest of his life?
Luck for him, I remembered that I was not a Brazilian savage anymore. I
was British now and I had to act like one: "Oh, are they? Thanks for
sharing that with me. Would you mind telling me what your favourite
bands are? More tea?" He then named a few bands, including
some [**Forró**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forr%C3%B3) bands. Shock!
Horror!! Blasphemy!!! I really wanted to kill him right there. Fuck the
British citizenship. How could a guy, that also liked punk rock music,
say that the band I liked was rubbish and then name some stupid Forro
bands as his favourite bands?

After quite a long list of swear words pronounced in a very loud tone, I
asked him to elaborate. All songs of Legiao Urbana, he said, are played
with three or four chords maximum. Their lyrics are great, but they are
very poor musicians. The Forro bands are totally the opposite. The
lyrics suck but no one cares. Their are great musicians that focus on
creating music for people to dance.

That conversation made me realise something really important. If you are
a person like me, good music is related to good and strong lyrics. For a
musician like my friend, good music is about the techniques used by
other musicians when playing their instruments, regardless of the
lyrics. For a person that likes to sing, she may appreciate opera, even
if she doesn't have a clue about what the words mean.

**But what does it have to do with tests?**

You cannot expect to produce quality code just by ***listening to your
test***. If you don't know what good code looks like, you are pretty
much ***test deaf***. Musicians have a trained ear to listen to each
instrument individually while the music is playing. They can also
imagine, quite precisely, how different instruments could be combined to
create new music.

Walking around asking other developers to listen to their tests, as if
this advice alone would make them produce quality code immediately,
doesn't work. It may make us look smart (or at least feel smart) but it
does not really help the other developers receiving the advice. It's too
vague.

If we want to produce quality code, we should study the concepts and
techniques that lead to it: Domain Driven Design, Clean Code, SOLID
principles, design patterns, coupling, cohesion, different programming
languages and paradigms, architecture, just to name a few. Once we get a
good understanding of all these things, we will have an implied
knowledge about what constitutes good code. This implied knowledge is
what may cure our **test deafness**, allowing us to *listen to our
tests* in order to produce quality code.
