---
author: 
 - David Hall
layout: event
name: sc-london-2019
location: "Skills Matter, CodeNode, 10 South Pl, London EC2M 7EB"
image:
    src: /assets/custom/img/events/2019_sc_london.png
title: "SC London 2019"
hidden: true
event-dates: 
 starts: 2019-10-03
 ends: 2019-10-04
event-page-url: http://sc-london.com
date: 2019-03-25 10:00:00
---

## Don’t Miss SC London 2019

Once again Codurance is pleased to be supporting SC London to make sure craftspeople far and wide can come together for 2-days of networking; idea sharing and fun. In 2018 we welcomed people from the UK; across Europe; Israel; North America and even Australia. 

### SC London 2019

Now in its third year we’re working hard to deliver a lineup as impressive as in previous years - no easy feat when you look at the experts who have already taken to the stage and shared their knowledge, tips and insights in 2017 and 2018. 

However...we are making great progress and are pleased to welcome back some of our favourites, including Trisha Gee, Simon Brown, Sandro Mancuso and Mashooq Badar plus to extend a warm welcome to ‘first-timers’ such as the impressive Gojko Adzic, John Ferguson Smart and Frances Buontempo. Be sure to keep checking Twitter @SCLConf, Instagram @sclconf, Linkedin or the website for further announcements.

### Recorded Talks

If you didn’t manage to make it to previous conferences then you can enjoy the talks at your leisure by visiting sc-london.com.

### The Venue
This year, once again we’ll be returning to CodeNode.  as many of you know is in the heart of London and in our opinion a great place for tech events. This year we’ve hired the whole venue and look forward to welcoming attendees and sponsors alike during 3-4 October. 

### More Information
There’s more information is on the SC London site but if you have any questions about getting involved as a sponsor or delegate please do get in (touch)[hello@codurance.com]

